.TH LISPIUM 1 "2026" "lispium" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
lispium \- symbolic computer algebra system with a lisp syntax
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lispium
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ arguments ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Lispium is a symbolic CAS written in pure Zig: exact rationals, calculus,
equation solving, linear algebra, units, macros, and an interactive lisp
with tail-call optimization. Programs are prefix S-expressions in
.B .lspm
files.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B repl \fR[\fIfile.lspm\fR]
Start the interactive REPL, optionally preloading a file. Multi-line input
continues until parentheses balance; \fB_\fR holds the last result;
\fBhistory\fR, \fB!!\fR, and \fB!n\fR recall inputs; \fB?func\fR shows
documentation.
.TP
.B eval \fI"expr"\fR | \fB-\fR
Evaluate one or more expressions (\fB-\fR reads from standard input).
Exits nonzero on error.
.TP
.B run \fR[\fB--watch\fR] [\fB--time\fR] \fIfile.lspm\fR [\fIargs\fR...]
Run a source file. \fB--watch\fR reruns on change; \fB--time\fR reports the
total wall time; extra arguments are available via \fB(args)\fR. Files may
start with \fB#!/usr/bin/env -S lispium run\fR.
.TP
.B fmt \fR[\fB--check\fR|\fB--stdout\fR] [\fIpaths\fR...]
Format source to the canonical style (STYLE.md) in place. Directories
recurse; \fB-\fR formats stdin to stdout; no paths means the current
directory.
.TP
.B test \fR[\fIdir\fR|\fIfiles\fR...]
Run \fB*_test.lspm\fR files (assert-based) and report ok/FAIL per file.
.TP
.B docs \fR[\fIname\fR|\fB--html\fR]
Builtin reference: list all names, describe one, or emit the static
reference site.
.TP
.B completions \fIbash\fR|\fIzsh\fR|\fIfish\fR
Print a shell completion script.
.TP
.B lsp
Start the language server (hover, completion, diagnostics, formatting,
go-to-definition, document symbols).
.TP
.B bench \fR[\fB--plain\fR|\fB--json\fR|\fB--quick\fR]
Run the benchmark suite.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
lispium eval "(diff (^ x 3) x)"
lispium eval "(+ 1/3 1/6)"
lispium run --time script.lspm arg1
lispium fmt --check .
lispium repl mylib.lspm
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
Documentation: https://tetraslam.github.io/lispium/
.br
Source: https://github.com/Tetraslam/lispium
